README.md, before:

# Context length probing

This is the source code repository for the ACL 2023 short paper [*Black-box language model explanation by context length probing*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.14815) by Ondřej Cífka and Antoine Liutkus.

⚠️ When cloning the repo, use `--single-branch` to avoid fetching the demo data files.

[![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cifkao/context-probing/assets/demo.gif)](https://cifkao.github.io/context-probing/)

Links:  
[📃 Pre-print](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.14815)  
[🕹️ Demo](https://cifkao.github.io/context-probing/#demo)  
[🤗 Space](https://huggingface.co/spaces/cifkao/context-probing)   
[📉 Computed metrics](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7513991)

Citation:
```bibtex
@inproceedings{cifka2022blackbox,
  title={Black-box language model explanation by context length probing},
  author={C{\'i}fka, Ond{\v{r}}ej and Liutkus, Antoine},
  booktitle = "Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers)",
  note = "to appear",
  month = july,
  year = "2023",
  address = "Toronto, Canada",
  publisher = "Association for Computational Linguistics"
}
```

## Usage

Install the package with with `pip install -e .`, or better (to install exact dependency versions from the lockfile), `pip install poetry && poetry install`.

The `context_probing` package provides functions to use our method with 🤗 Transformers with a few lines of code:
```python
from context_probing import run_probing
from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModelForCausalLM

tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("gpt2")
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained("gpt2")

inputs = tokenizer("Harry heard from Hogwarts one sunny morning about a week after he had arrived at The Burrow.")
scores = run_probing(inputs=inputs, model=model, tokenizer=tokenizer)
print(scores)
```
```python
{'kl_div': tensor([[0.0, 1.2, 1.4,  ..., 7.5, 1.8, 2.5],
                   [nan, 0.0, 0.6,  ..., 3.4, 1.3, 2.2],
                   [nan, nan, 0.0,  ..., 2.7, 2.0, 1.2],
                   ...,
                   [nan, nan, nan,  ..., nan, nan, 0.0]], dtype=torch.float16),
 'xent': tensor([[8.9, 4.7, 12.1, ..., 7.5, 3.2, 4.8],
                 [nan, 4.0, 11.3, ..., 3.4, 2.7, 5.1],
                 [nan, nan, 10.7, ..., 2.7, 3.5, 4.3],
                 ...,
                 [nan, nan,  nan, ..., nan, nan, 8.2]], dtype=torch.float16)}
```
The first dimension of each scores tensor corresponds to context length (from 1 up to the total number of tokens), the second dimension to the _target_ token position, starting with the second token ("heard") and ending with the end-of-sequence token ("<|endoftext|>").

You can limit the maximum context length (and hence save computation time and space) by setting the `window_len` parameter to less than the number of input tokens. Otherwise `window_len` will automatically be set so that it doesn't exceed the number of tokens or the maximum input length allowed by the model.

To obtain the differential importance scores:
```python
from context_probing import get_delta_scores

imp_scores = get_delta_scores(scores["kl_div"], normalize=True, nan_to_zero=False)
```
The first dimension corresponds to the target tokens, the second one to the context tokens. We can plot the scores like so:
```python
from context_probing import ids_to_readable_tokens
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

tokens = ids_to_readable_tokens(tokenizer, inputs["input_ids"] + [tokenizer.eos_token_id])
plt.imshow(imp_scores, cmap="RdYlGn", vmin=-1., vmax=1.)
plt.colorbar(shrink=0.8)
plt.yticks(range(len(tokens) - 1), tokens[1:])
plt.xticks(range(len(tokens) - 1), tokens[:-1], rotation=90)
plt.xlabel("Context token")
plt.ylabel("Target token")
```
![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cifkao/context-probing/assets/imp_score_imshow.png)

### Scripts and notebooks

These are the scripts and notebooks used for the paper. They allow for larger models, inputs and contexts than the simple API described above.
- `conllu_to_hf` – Converts a Universal Dependencies dataset in the [CoNLL-U](https://universaldependencies.org/format.html) format to a tokenized [HuggingFace dataset](https://github.com/huggingface/datasets) with the annotations included. E.g.:
  ```bash
  python -m context_probing.scripts.conllu_to_hf \
      data/ud-treebanks-v2.10/UD_English-LinES/en_lines-ud-dev.conllu \
      data/en_lines-ud-dev \
      --tokenizer-path gpt2
  ```
- `predict_sliding` – Applies a GPT-style language model along a sliding window and saves the logits as NumPy file(s). E.g.:
  ```bash
  for shard in {0..499}; do
      python -m context_probing.scripts.predict_sliding \
          --model-path EleutherAI/gpt-j-6B --window-len 1024 \
          --total-shards 500 --shard-id $shard \
          --batch-size 8 --num-proc 8 \
          data/en_lines-ud-dev \
          preds/gpt-j-6B/en_lines-ud-dev
  done
  ```
  ⚠️ For the `en_lines-ud-dev` dataset, this will produce 2.1 TB of data (4.2 GB per shard).  
  ⚠️ You may want to parallelize this by submitting each shard to a different compute node. Adjust `--num-proc` and `--batch-size` to the number of available CPU cores and memory.
- `preds_to_metrics` – Reads the predictions produced by `predict_sliding` and computes different metrics (cross entropy, KL divergence, top k predictions). E.g.:
  ```bash
  python -m context_probing.scripts.preds_to_metrics \
      --tokenizer-path EleutherAI/gpt-j-6B --topk 10 --max-ctx 1023 \
      data/en_lines-ud-dev \
      'preds/gpt-j-6B/en_lines-ud-dev-0*-of-00500.npy' \
      gpt-j-6B.en_lines-ud-dev.metrics.pth
  ```
  The computed metrics (for the `en_lines-ud-dev` dataset) can be downloaded [here](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7513991).
- `process_metrics.ipynb` – Produces the figures from the paper and the data files for the demo.

Commit message:

Update README with information about unigram_logprobs

README.md, after:

# Context length probing

This is the source code repository for the ACL 2023 short paper [*Black-box language model explanation by context length probing*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.14815) by Ondřej Cífka and Antoine Liutkus.

⚠️ When cloning the repo, use `--single-branch` to avoid fetching the demo data files.

[![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cifkao/context-probing/assets/demo.gif)](https://cifkao.github.io/context-probing/)

Links:  
[📃 Pre-print](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.14815)  
[🕹️ Demo](https://cifkao.github.io/context-probing/#demo)  
[🤗 Space](https://huggingface.co/spaces/cifkao/context-probing)   
[📉 Computed metrics](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7513991)

Citation:
```bibtex
@inproceedings{cifka2022blackbox,
  title={Black-box language model explanation by context length probing},
  author={C{\'i}fka, Ond{\v{r}}ej and Liutkus, Antoine},
  booktitle = "Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers)",
  note = "to appear",
  month = july,
  year = "2023",
  address = "Toronto, Canada",
  publisher = "Association for Computational Linguistics"
}
```

## Usage

Install the package with with `pip install -e .`, or better (to install exact dependency versions from the lockfile), `pip install poetry && poetry install`.

### Running context length probing

The `context_probing` package provides functions to use our method with 🤗 Transformers with a few lines of code:
```python
from context_probing import run_probing
from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModelForCausalLM

tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("gpt2")
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained("gpt2")

inputs = tokenizer("Harry heard from Hogwarts one sunny morning about a week after he had arrived at The Burrow.")
scores = run_probing(inputs=inputs, model=model, tokenizer=tokenizer)
print(scores)
```
```python
{'kl_div': tensor([[nan, nan, nan, ..., nan, nan, nan],
                   [0.0, 1.2, 1.4, ..., 7.5, 1.8, 2.5],
                   [nan, 0.0, 0.6, ..., 3.4, 1.3, 2.2],
                   [nan, nan, 0.0, ..., 2.7, 2.0, 1.2],
                   ...,
                   [nan, nan, nan,  ..., nan, nan, 0.0]], dtype=torch.float16),
 'xent': tensor([[nan, nan, nan,  ..., nan, nan, nan],
                 [8.9, 4.7, 12.1, ..., 7.5, 3.2, 4.8],
                 [nan, 4.0, 11.3, ..., 3.4, 2.7, 5.1],
                 [nan, nan, 10.7, ..., 2.7, 3.5, 4.3],
                 ...,
                 [nan, nan,  nan, ..., nan, nan, 8.2]], dtype=torch.float16)}
```
The first dimension of each scores tensor corresponds to context length (from 0 up to the total number of tokens), the second dimension to the _target_ token position, starting with the second token ("heard") and ending with the end-of-sequence token ("<|endoftext|>"). Notice that the values are `nan` for context length 0; see [below](#estimating-unigram-probabilities) for how to estimate the metrics for context length 0.

You can limit the maximum context length (and hence save computation time and space) by setting the `window_len` parameter to less than the number of input tokens. Otherwise `window_len` will automatically be set so that it doesn't exceed the number of tokens or the maximum input length allowed by the model.

### Differential importance scores
To obtain the differential importance scores:
```python
from context_probing import get_delta_scores

imp_scores = get_delta_scores(scores["kl_div"], normalize=True, nan_to_zero=False)
```
The first dimension corresponds to the target tokens, the second one to the context tokens. We can plot the scores like so:
```python
from context_probing import ids_to_readable_tokens
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

tokens = ids_to_readable_tokens(tokenizer, inputs["input_ids"] + [tokenizer.eos_token_id])
plt.imshow(imp_scores, cmap="RdYlGn", vmin=-1., vmax=1.)
plt.colorbar(shrink=0.8)
plt.yticks(range(len(tokens) - 1), tokens[1:])
plt.xticks(range(len(tokens) - 1), tokens[:-1], rotation=90)
plt.xlabel("Context token")
plt.ylabel("Target token")
```
![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cifkao/context-probing/assets/imp_score_imshow.png)

### Context length 0
A neural language model normally cannot output unigram probabilities (with context length 0) as it is always conditioned on some input. Consequently, we cannot easily compute the importance score for the token immediately preceding the target token (i.e. context length 1) – that is, unless we _know_ the unigram probabilities (e.g. if we have access to the language model's training data). If we do, we can pass them to `run_probing()` via the `unigram_logprobs` parameter.

If the unigram probabilities are not known, we can estimate them using the `estimate_unigram_logprobs()` function, e.g.: 
```python
from context_probing import estimate_unigram_logprobs

unigram_logprobs = estimate_unigram_logprobs(model=model, tokenizer=tokenizer)
scores = run_probing(inputs=inputs, model=model, tokenizer=tokenizer, unigram_logprobs=unigram_logprobs)
imp_scores = get_delta_scores(scores["kl_div"], normalize=True, nan_to_zero=False)
...
```
Notice that the importance score matrix now has the diagonal filled in, which corresponds to the immediately preceding tokens:
![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cifkao/context-probing/assets/imp_score_unigram_imshow.png)

### Scripts and notebooks

These are the scripts and notebooks used for the paper. They allow for larger models, inputs and contexts than the simple API described above.
- `conllu_to_hf` – Converts a Universal Dependencies dataset in the [CoNLL-U](https://universaldependencies.org/format.html) format to a tokenized [HuggingFace dataset](https://github.com/huggingface/datasets) with the annotations included. E.g.:
  ```bash
  python -m context_probing.scripts.conllu_to_hf \
      data/ud-treebanks-v2.10/UD_English-LinES/en_lines-ud-dev.conllu \
      data/en_lines-ud-dev \
      --tokenizer-path gpt2
  ```
- `predict_sliding` – Applies a GPT-style language model along a sliding window and saves the logits as NumPy file(s). E.g.:
  ```bash
  for shard in {0..499}; do
      python -m context_probing.scripts.predict_sliding \
          --model-path EleutherAI/gpt-j-6B --window-len 1024 \
          --total-shards 500 --shard-id $shard \
          --batch-size 8 --num-proc 8 \
          data/en_lines-ud-dev \
          preds/gpt-j-6B/en_lines-ud-dev
  done
  ```
  ⚠️ For the `en_lines-ud-dev` dataset, this will produce 2.1 TB of data (4.2 GB per shard).  
  ⚠️ You may want to parallelize this by submitting each shard to a different compute node. Adjust `--num-proc` and `--batch-size` to the number of available CPU cores and memory.
- `preds_to_metrics` – Reads the predictions produced by `predict_sliding` and computes different metrics (cross entropy, KL divergence, top k predictions). E.g.:
  ```bash
  python -m context_probing.scripts.preds_to_metrics \
      --tokenizer-path EleutherAI/gpt-j-6B --topk 10 --max-ctx 1023 \
      data/en_lines-ud-dev \
      'preds/gpt-j-6B/en_lines-ud-dev-0*-of-00500.npy' \
      gpt-j-6B.en_lines-ud-dev.metrics.pth
  ```
  The computed metrics (for the `en_lines-ud-dev` dataset) can be downloaded [here](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7513991).
- `process_metrics.ipynb` – Produces the figures from the paper and the data files for the demo.
